KEP-5709: Add well-known pod network readiness gate (#5995)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-network/5709-pod-network-readiness-gates/README.md

- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) within one minor version of promotion to GA
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Kubernetes currently has no explicit signal for whether a pod's

> network has been fully programmed and is ready to receive traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes currently has no explicit signal for whether a pod
has been fully attached to the pod network and is ready to receive traffic.
```

The closest existing condition, [`PodReadyToStartContainers`][KEP-3085],
indicates that the pod sandbox has been created and CNI `ADD` has
returned — but not that the network datapath is fully programmed.
This KEP introduces a built-in [pod readiness gate][KEP-580]
condition that the network plugin sets to indicate network readiness,
cleanly separating application readiness (answered by readiness probes) from
network readiness (answered by the network plugin). This becomes
especially important as [KEP-4559] moves kubelet probes to run
inside the pod network namespace, removing the implicit network
reachability signal that today's over-the-network probes

> accidentally provide.

Author: aaah I thought it was a case where it ended up being a side effect...
so are we saying that we actually intentionally indeed do both? - I thought at kubecon london we heard it differently but maybe my memory is failing me.. 
if this was intentional let me change the narrative a bit because that means we do have a signal for when network is ready just that its implicit

> accidentally provide.

Reviewer: Well... I guess it was probably neither fully intentional nor fully accidental originally. But anyway, the behavior pre-dates Kubernetes 1.0, so it doesn't make sense to talk about it like people are using it wrong.

> accidentally provide.

Author: makes sense, let me remove "accidental" word

[KEP-3085]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/3085-pod-conditions-for-starting-completition-of-sandbox-creation/README.md
[KEP-4559]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4559
[KEP-580]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-network/580-pod-readiness-gates/README.md

## Motivation

Today, kubelet readiness probes are executed from the host network
namespace, sending traffic over the pod network to reach the pod.
A side effect of this design is that a successful readiness probe
implicitly confirms that the network plugin has assigned an IP and
programmed the necessary routes and rules — i.e., that the pod is
reachable over the network. However, this was never the intended
purpose of readiness probes; they exist to answer "is the
application ready to serve traffic?", not "is the network path
functional?". The two concerns have been conflated by accident of

> implementation.

Author: do you know if we ever documented that part? I think readiness probe definition is pretty much around the application serving traffic or not part right?

> implementation.

Author: tried to word it differently.. let's see if its better

This implicit signal is also unreliable. Even today, a readiness
probe can succeed before NetworkPolicy rules are fully programmed,
as [documented in the Kubernetes docs][np-pod-lifecycle]. The CNI
plugin's `ADD` call typically returns before the pod is fully
plumbed into the network, because blocking on full network
programming would serialize pod creation and significantly degrade
bulk pod startup performance. The existing
[`PodReadyToStartContainers`][KEP-3085] condition (originally named
`PodHasNetwork`, renamed because the old name was misleading)
captures the moment CNI `ADD` returns and the sandbox is ready —
but this does not mean the network datapath is fully programmed
(e.g., OVS flows installed, nftables rules in place, routes
propagated to remote nodes). The readiness probe happens to paper

> over this gap most of the time, but not always.

Author: yea I thought I wrote that but clearly didn't, good catch

[KEP-4559] makes this problem explicit. It proposes moving TCP,
HTTP, and gRPC probes to run inside the pod network namespace using
CRI `PortForward()`, connecting to `localhost` rather than the pod
IP. This solves critical security and architectural problems (the
blind SSRF attack, the NetworkPolicy hole that exempts kubelet
probes, and constraints on network architectures with overlapping
pod IPs), but it means the probe no longer traverses the pod
network at all. Without a replacement signal, the following failure
scenario becomes possible:

1. A pod starts and its application begins listening on a port.
2. The new localhost-based readiness probe succeeds.
3. The pod is marked `Ready` and added to Service endpoints.

> 4. But the CNI plugin has not yet finished programming the network.

Author: yup agree

5. Traffic is routed to the pod and fails because it is not yet
   reachable.

> Rather than trying to preserve the accidental coupling between

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather than trying to preserve the historical coupling between
```

gate answers "can traffic reach this pod?" — a clean separation
that is more accurate and reliable than the implicit signal we
depend on today.

[np-pod-lifecycle]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/network-policies/#pod-lifecycle

### Goals

- Define a well-known pod readiness gate condition type that network
  plugins set to signal that a pod's network datapath is fully
  programmed and the pod is reachable from other pods.
- Scope is CNI-networked pods, where the network plugin must program
  the datapath after the sandbox is created.
- Provide a standard convention that all network plugins can adopt,
  so that the ecosystem converges on a single condition type rather
  than each plugin inventing its own.
- Cleanly separate application readiness (answered by readiness
  probes) from network readiness (answered by the network plugin),
  making the overall readiness model explicit rather than relying on
  the accidental coupling between over-the-network probes and
  network programming.

### Non-Goals

- Implementing this readiness gate in any specific network plugin
  (OVN-Kubernetes, Cilium, Calico, etc.). This KEP defines the convention;

>   adoption is up to each network plugin.

Author: oh good point, thanks for raising this

- Modifying kubelet's built-in readiness evaluation logic. The
  proposal builds on the existing [pod readiness gates][KEP-580]
  mechanism without changing how kubelet computes the `Ready`
  condition.
- Distributed multi-node network probing (e.g., verifying that a pod
  is reachable from every other node in the cluster). The scope is
  limited to the network plugin on the local node signaling that it

>   has finished programming the datapath.

Author: yea good point. let me reword this better

- Host-network pods (`hostNetwork: true`). These pods use the node's
  existing network namespace; there is no plugin-managed datapath to
  program.
- Replacing or changing existing readiness probes. Readiness probes
  continue to serve their current purpose of indicating application
  readiness; this KEP adds a complementary signal for network
  readiness.

## Proposal

This KEP defines a well-known pod condition type that network plugins
set to indicate that a pod's network datapath is fully programmed and
the pod is reachable from other pods. All three approaches below

> share two things:

Author: yea I re-worded this part too many times - Approach A/B/C :D is what I meant. - but they are toooo way below.. :( let me make this more explicit

> share two things:

Reviewer: I was commenting on "share two things", not "all three approaches"; you only list _one_ thing that the three approaches share, not two.

> share two things:

Author: yea there is only one thing I guess.. if there were two in my head now can't remember :(
I think signaling was the common one and then the actual readiness gate addition side of things..

- **Signaling.** The network plugin's node agent PATCHes
  `status.conditions` to set the condition to `True` when the
  datapath is ready.

The approaches differ in how the readiness gate enters
`spec.readinessGates` — which is the prerequisite for kubelet to
account for the condition when computing the pod's `Ready` status.

<<[UNRESOLVED which-approach ]>>

Reviewers: please comment on which approach you prefer. After
agreement, the chosen approach becomes the proposal and the other
two move to Alternatives.

<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

### Condition type

<<[UNRESOLVED condition-type-naming ]>>

Three naming options are under consideration:

1. **`<plugin-domain>/network-ready`** (e.g., `cilium.io/network-ready`,
   `ovn-kubernetes.io/network-ready`) — each network plugin uses its
   own domain prefix. Ownership is unambiguous, and in multi-plugin
   clusters (e.g., Multus + DRA) each plugin can independently signal
   its own condition. Follows the custom pod condition naming
   convention described in [KEP-580]. Trade-off: there is no single
   condition name that operators and tooling can rely on across
   clusters, and Approach B (kubelet hardcodes the condition) would

>    not work with per-plugin names.

Author: added this part as well

2. **`networking.kubernetes.io/pod-network-ready`** — a single
   domain-qualified name under the `networking.kubernetes.io` prefix.
   Gives operators and tooling a consistent name to query across any
   cluster while still following the [KEP-580] naming convention.
   Trade-off: in multi-plugin clusters only one plugin can own the

>    condition, or the plugins must coordinate who sets it.

Author: right! in general the problem I had with one well known condition is the fact that any time more than one plugin is involved in the cluster then this doesn't work yea

For the remainder of this KEP the placeholder `<NetworkReady>` is used
wherever the condition type appears. Reviewers: please comment on which
naming option you prefer.

<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

### Approach A: Network plugin webhook (no core changes)

The network plugin deploys a mutating admission webhook that
intercepts pod `CREATE` requests and appends `<NetworkReady>` to
`spec.readinessGates`. Because readiness gates are immutable after
creation ([KEP-580]), the webhook must fire at pod creation time.
If the pod spec already contains the readiness gate (for example,
added by the user or a higher-level controller), the webhook is a
no-op. The plugin's node agent then PATCHes `status.conditions` to
set the condition to `True` when the datapath is ready.

- **Pro:** Follows [KEP-580]'s design exactly; no core Kubernetes
  changes required.
- **Con:** Every network plugin must independently implement the
  webhook.
- **Con:** The webhook sits in the pod creation path, adding
  latency to every pod create.
- **Con:** If the webhook is unavailable and `failurePolicy` is
  `Ignore`, pods are created without the gate and silently lose

>   protection.

Author: added both

### Approach B: Kubelet natively checks a well-known condition (kubelet change)

Kubelet is modified to natively factor the well-known
`<NetworkReady>` condition from `status.conditions` into its `Ready`
computation — the same way it already factors in `ContainersReady`.
No readiness gate in `spec.readinessGates` is needed and no webhook
or spec mutation is involved. The network plugin only needs to PATCH

> the status condition; kubelet does the rest.

Author: added this to cons as well

  [KEP-3085] added `PodReadyToStartContainers` as another
  kubelet-managed well-known condition.
- **Con:** Requires a kubelet code change, increasing scope.
- **Con:** Unlike `ContainersReady` (which kubelet itself sets),
  `<NetworkReady>` would be set by an external agent — making
  kubelet's `Ready` computation depend on an out-of-tree component
  for the first time.

### Approach C: API server injects built-in readiness gate (API server change)

The API server automatically injects `<NetworkReady>` into
`spec.readinessGates` for every pod at creation time, making the
readiness gate built-in. The network plugin only needs to PATCH the
status condition to `True` when the datapath is ready.

- **Pro:** Every pod gets the readiness gate automatically,
  with no webhook needed, so no latency during pod create.
- **Con:** First-ever built-in readiness gate; steers away from
  [KEP-580]'s original design, which explicitly delegated readiness
  gate injection to external controllers via webhooks.
- **Con:** Backward-compatibility risk — if a network plugin does
  not set the condition, pods are stuck not-Ready forever. Requires

>   a feature gate and careful rollout.

Author: yea I thought so .. I'll move C to alternatives

> 

Author: > Approach D: like A, but have some declarative way of forcing the gate to be added (CEL?), rather than requiring a webhook. Of course, that would require a new apiserver feature, and pretty soon we're [shaving yaks](http://www.catb.org/~esr/jargon/html/Y/yak-shaving.html).

haha I'll see if there is something that's possible in the realm - I haven't being paying attention to all the declarative stuff + I didn't check if CELs are starting to be used in the older Core APIs like for Pods?

> 
> Approach E: like B, but add new CRI API to indicate network-attachedness to kubelet, so the network plugin signals this to CRI (somehow), and CRI signals it to kubelet, and kubelet updates the status. (This would make more sense in a DRA/NRI networking future... maybe it's worth thinking about this _in addition to_ Approach A, where A is the short-term fix, and E is the long-term fix?)

yea this is possible. I had this in my mind as well the plugin->CRI->Kubelet but then I was like "ok that's deviating from the readiness gates API usage around which we wanted to structure it per previous discussions" but yea I think let me add this in as well.

### Definition of "network ready"

What constitutes "network ready" is intentionally left to the network
plugin, because the details vary by implementation. As a general
guideline, the condition should be set to `True` when the pod's
datapath is fully programmed and the pod can receive traffic from
other pods in the cluster. Examples of what a plugin might wait for
include OVS flows or eBPF programs installed, nftables/iptables
rules for NetworkPolicy applied, or routes propagated to remote
nodes. The plugin SHOULD NOT wait for external reachability from
outside the cluster (e.g., Ingress or cloud load balancers), as those
are separate concerns with their own readiness signals.

> ### User Stories

Reviewer: User stories are optional and can be omitted if they don't actually tell the reader anything new. (ie, don't just make up user stories to fill in the template, if you've already fully explained the problem to the extent that we understand it in the rest of the KEP)

Author: OK this is good to know, I might remove this section - I filled it in because of the template asking for it

#### Story 1: Preventing traffic black-holes during pod startup

A platform team runs a large cluster with an overlay network plugin.
They observe occasional HTTP 5xx errors immediately after a
Deployment rolls out new pods, because the pods are marked `Ready`
and added to Service endpoints before the network plugin has finished
programming routes on remote nodes. After the network plugin adopts
this KEP's readiness gate, new pods are held out of endpoints until
the plugin confirms network readiness, eliminating the transient
errors.

#### Story 2: NetworkPolicy enforcement before traffic arrives

A compliance team requires that no traffic reach a pod before its
NetworkPolicy rules are fully programmed. Today, there is a

> [documented race][np-pod-lifecycle] where a pod can receive traffic

Author: haha I guess that race is probably in ovnk.. :D

before the network plugin finishes installing policy rules. With
this readiness gate, the network plugin defers setting the condition
to `True` until both the datapath and all applicable NetworkPolicy
rules are in place, closing this gap.

#### Story 3: Pods with multiple network devices via DRA

An HPC team uses Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) to attach
multiple network devices to a single pod — for example, a primary
cluster network interface plus a high-speed RDMA interface. Each
device may be programmed by a different plugin or driver, and each
has its own readiness timeline. The pod should not receive traffic

> until all its network devices are fully plumbed. The network plugin

Author: > I don't think that's correct. The network readiness condition is just about "can the endpoint be reached by Services". 

that's the readiness probe right? for the network readiness we also want an interface level clarity right?

As of right now, even when using DRA and multiple networks, Services are always reached over the cluster-default pod network, so that's what the network readiness condition should be checking.

I understand, I was assuming more for the future - also with DRA itself - even if we forget services and readiness probes... for this network readiness gate we want it to be "pod is reachable over this network device A" right ? to be the signal. If I have a DRA-Net driver for SRIOV interface and then there is the default network plugin then pod is ready from readiness networking gate perspective when both are plumbed in and ready right? - unless mutability becomes a thing for pods in future

> 
> If the code running within the pod needs access to secondary networks to do its job, then that's an application-level readiness issue, _not_ a network readiness issue. (Even if the secondary network is attached, there's no guarantee that the remote database on that secondary network is actually up and running anyway; you would want to have your application-level readiness probe test that, and then in that case, there is no need to explicitly consider secondary-network-reachability.)
> 
> How any of this would interact with secondary networks in a future multi-network k8s environment depends on the multi-network networking model...
> 
> 1. If Services always point to endpoints on the cluster-default pod network, then the network readiness API doesn't need to consider other networks.
> 2. If Services can exist on multiple networks, but any given Pod can only be an endpoint of Services on a single network, then we would want the Pod's Readiness to take into account its reachability only on that single network.
> 3. If Services can exist on multiple networks, and a given Pod may be an endpoint of Services on multiple networks, then probably a Pod's overall Readiness should not be tied to its reachability on any particular network, and we just should keep the  signal separate from Pod Readiness, and have the service proxy start tracking both Readiness and reachability separately, so that future multi-network service proxies can correctly distinguish things like "Pod A is not ready; Pod B is ready and reachable over Network X but not over Network Y; Pod C is ready and reachable over both Network X and Network Y."
>    
>    * (though we _could_ simplify and say that multi-network Pods can only be endpoints of Services when they are reachable on all of the networks they are attached to).

yea I agree with most of what you have said, I think the issue I have is in differentiating networking for a pod being ready to mean networking for all interfaces or endpoints on the pod being ready for traffic.

> until all its network devices are fully plumbed. The network plugin

Reviewer: > > The network readiness condition is just about "can the endpoint be reached by Services".
> 
> that's the readiness probe right? for the network readiness we also want an interface level clarity right?

The goal of the `Ready` condition is mostly to say when a Pod is eligible to receive endpoint traffic for Services that point to it. We need to take the attached-ness state of the cluster-default pod network into account, because if the pod is not fully attached to the cluster-default pod network, then traffic can't reach its IPs, so Services shouldn't point to it. However, the same argument doesn't hold for alternative pod networks.

I guess a particular implementation of multi-network could include the semantics "a pod is not ready until all of its networks are attached", but that would just be something that that implementation decided to do.

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Kubernetes currently has no explicit signal for whether a pod
has been fully attached to the pod network and is ready to receive traffic.
The closest existing condition, [`PodReadyToStartContainers`][KEP-3085],
indicates that the pod sandbox has been created and CNI `ADD` has

> returned — but not that the network datapath is fully programmed.

Reviewer 2: "network datapath fully programmed" is something that should be defined first as it means different things depending on the implementations and the architecture:
- with simple cni + kube-proxy + kube-network-policies it will mean 3 different components
- with cilium it will mean a single component achieve cluster wide consensus (they use identities for network policies)
- with ovn and calico it seems there are discussions already explaining the details

This KEP introduces a well-known [pod readiness gate][KEP-580]

> condition that the network plugin sets to indicate network readiness,

Reviewer 2: there are a lot of clusters that the network plugin is just a simple cni ptp plugin and does not have the concept of uber network plugin that handles all networking things, this simple network cluster does not have the way to signal back as they are one shot execution

Reviewer: previously: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5995#discussion_r3040051992

cleanly separating application readiness (answered by readiness probes) from

> network readiness (answered by the network plugin). This becomes

Reviewer 2: this is enforcing a particular architecture for kubernetes clusters that is not universal

especially important as [KEP-4559] proposes to move kubelet probes to run
inside the pod network namespace, removing the implicit network
reachability signal that today's over-the-network probes
also provide.

[KEP-3085]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/3085-pod-conditions-for-starting-completition-of-sandbox-creation/README.md
[KEP-4559]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4559
[KEP-580]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-network/580-pod-readiness-gates/README.md

## Motivation

Today, kubelet readiness probes are executed from the host network
namespace, sending traffic over the pod network to reach the pod.
Because the probe traverses the pod network, a successful
readiness probe implicitly suggests both that the application is
ready to serve traffic and that the network plugin may have
assigned an IP and programmed the necessary routes and rules —
i.e., that the pod is reachable over the network. This behaviour pre-dates
Kubernetes 1.0 and is well established, but coupling these two
concerns in a single probe becomes a limitation as the network
stack evolves.

> This implicit signal is also unreliable for two reasons. First,

Reviewer 2: I would not say unreliable , this has been working for a lot of years, what is unreliable here to me is the programming of the network by some specific network plugins that require to achieve cluster network consensus ... so this is more a problem of those type of plugins that add a latency to the dataplane programming and that have problem to scale with the number of nodes of the cluster, since the larger the claster the larger the latency to program all the dataplanes

Reviewer 2: I see is explained later

because kubelet runs on the same node as the pod, a probe can
succeed over the local network path before routes or flows are
programmed on remote nodes — so the pod may not yet be reachable
from other nodes. Second, NetworkPolicy implementations
[explicitly exempt kubelet probes][np-pod-lifecycle] from policy
enforcement, so a probe can succeed before NetworkPolicy rules are
fully installed — meaning the pod may not yet be reachable by
peers on same node other than kubelet. The CNI plugin's `ADD` call typically

> returns before the pod is fully plumbed into the network, because

Reviewer 2: this sounds very specific of particular plugins, that "cheat" the penalty on pod startup latency but finishing the plumbing and dataplane programming asynchronous ... I personally feel that is the wrong behavior and that there was always the expectaction that after CNI ADD the network is ready ... you see the container runtime code and you can validate that assumption

Reviewer 2: this should not give the impression that this is the typical behavior overall, since this is specific of the network plugins that trying to provide an universal dataplane for the entire cluster

blocking on full network programming would serialize pod creation
and significantly degrade bulk pod startup performance. The
existing [`PodReadyToStartContainers`][KEP-3085] condition
(originally named `PodHasNetwork`, renamed because the old name
was misleading) captures the moment CNI `ADD` returns and the
sandbox is ready — but this does not mean the network datapath is
fully programmed (e.g., OVS flows installed, nftables rules in
place, routes propagated to remote nodes). The readiness probe
happens to paper over this gap most of the time, but not always.

[KEP-4559] makes this problem explicit. It proposes moving TCP,
HTTP, and gRPC probes to run inside the pod network namespace using

> CRI `PortForward()`, connecting to `localhost` rather than the pod

Reviewer 2: portForwards opens a websocket connection over localhost over a SPDY connection, as one of the maintainers of that feature I really don't think this is a good idea, that is very brittle and not ready for short  lived and periodic connections

Reviewer: I know we've had this discussion before, and I thought we had confirmed that at least one of the available APIs gave us a dumb connection to the container...

Reviewer 2: yeah, but through a lot of complexity and nested protocols https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/4006-transition-spdy-to-websockets that will make it very brittle and hard to troubleshoot

or spec mutation is involved. The network plugin only needs to PATCH
the status condition; kubelet does the rest.

- **Pro:** No `spec` mutation involved — no readiness gates, no
  webhook. The plugin only PATCHes a `status` condition, which is
  the simplest possible contract for plugin authors. There is
  precedent for this pattern: `ContainersReady` is already hardcoded
  into kubelet's `Ready` formula without being a readiness gate, and
  [KEP-3085] added `PodReadyToStartContainers` as another
  kubelet-managed well-known condition.
- **Con:** Requires a kubelet code change, increasing scope.
- **Con:** Unlike `ContainersReady` (which kubelet itself sets),
  `<NetworkReady>` would be set by an external agent — making
  kubelet's `Ready` computation depend on an out-of-tree component
  for the first time.
- **Con:** Kubelet has no way of knowing ahead of time whether
  the network plugin supports the condition. The plugin would need
  to set the condition to `False` during CNI ADD to signal that it
  will set it to `True` later, so kubelet knows to wait.
  Alternatively, kubelet could set it to `Unknown` before setting
  up the pod sandbox.

> 

Reviewer 2: this is a regression on the node startup latency and adding a dependency on a node component that depends on the control plane to update a node dependency ... this can also generate deadlock situations .. have you looked at https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-readiness-controller to solve this problem?

### Approach C: API server injects built-in readiness gate (API server change)

The API server automatically injects `<NetworkReady>` into
`spec.readinessGates` for every pod at creation time, making the

> readiness gate built-in. The network plugin only needs to PATCH the

Reviewer 2: same as before, this creates a possible deadlock situation, if something need to declare network readiness, it need to be able to validate 1. the data plane 2. have connectivity to the control plane ...  if connectivity to the control plane fails, then we create a complicated situation

status condition to `True` when the datapath is ready.

- **Pro:** Every pod gets the readiness gate automatically,
  with no webhook needed, so no latency during pod create.
- **Con:** First-ever built-in readiness gate; steers away from
  [KEP-580]'s original design, which explicitly delegated readiness
  gate injection to external controllers via webhooks.
- **Con:** Backward-compatibility risk — if a network plugin does
  not set the condition, pods are stuck not-Ready forever. Requires
  a feature gate and careful rollout.

### User Stories

#### Story 1: Preventing traffic black-holes during pod startup

A platform team runs a large cluster with an overlay network plugin.
They observe occasional HTTP 5xx errors immediately after a
Deployment rolls out new pods, because the pods are marked `Ready`
and added to Service endpoints before the network plugin has finished
programming routes on remote nodes. After the network plugin adopts
this KEP's readiness gate, new pods are held out of endpoints until
the plugin confirms network readiness, eliminating the transient
errors.

> #### Story 2: NetworkPolicy deny rules before traffic arrives

Reviewer 2: that is a limitation of the implementation, I already explain in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/85966#issuecomment-2624327783 how to use NRI to avoid this problem

A compliance team requires that NetworkPolicy deny rules are
enforced before a pod receives any traffic. The
[Kubernetes docs][np-pod-lifecycle] already require that
implementations must not allow traffic that should be denied, but
may temporarily deny traffic that should be allowed during startup.
With this readiness gate, the network plugin can defer setting the
condition to `True` until the datapath is fully programmed,
providing an additional layer of assurance that the pod is not
added to Service endpoints prematurely. Note that this KEP does
not change the existing NetworkPolicy contract — it only provides
a signal that the cluster-default network datapath is ready.

#### Story 3: Pods with multiple network devices via DRA

<<[UNRESOLVED multi-network-scope ]>>

An HPC team uses Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA) to attach
multiple network devices to a single pod — for example, a primary
cluster network interface plus a high-speed RDMA interface. Each
device may be programmed by a different plugin or driver, and each
has its own readiness timeline.

> It is an open question whether the network readiness condition

Reviewer 2: How are these secondary networks different than loadbalancers and external traffic? I do not think is a good design to make the core project be dependant on external networks that are out of scope of the cluster

| Webhook adds latency to the pod creation path. | A | The webhook performs a small, deterministic mutation (appending one entry to a list). Latency should be comparable to other mutating webhooks in the cluster. |
| Bug in kubelet readiness logic could affect all pods, not just those using network readiness. | B | The change should be small and well-tested. Kubelet already evaluates readiness gates; this adds one more condition to the same code path. |

## Design Details

### Webhook behaviour

The network plugin deploys a `MutatingWebhookConfiguration` that
targets pod `CREATE` operations. The webhook appends the well-known
readiness gate to `spec.readinessGates`:

```yaml
spec:
  readinessGates:
  - conditionType: "<NetworkReady>"
```

If the readiness gate is already present (injected by the user, a
Helm chart, or another controller), the webhook leaves the list
unchanged. The webhook should target pods that use CNI networking
(i.e., skip pods with `hostNetwork: true`).

### Node-agent PATCH flow

The plugin's node agent watches for pods on its node. When the agent
has finished programming the datapath for a pod, it issues a

> strategic-merge PATCH against the pod's `/status` subresource:

Reviewer 2: one of the main points in https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.23628 is the dependency on the control plane for the network plugins and the problems that causes ... this is just trying to adopt it and consolidate something I personally consider an antipattern , since it has performance and scalability issues and creates a lot of problems for the reliability of the cluster , that now has a strong dependency on a external subsystem
